Fable 91

The Two Friends and the Bear

A man was travelling together with his friend along a narrow(狹窄的) road through unknown(不熟悉的) mountains and winding(彎彎的) valleys. He felt safe because he and his friend could combine(聯合) forces to fight whatever danger Fortune might put in their way. As they were travelling along discussing(討論) various subjects(題目), a bear suddenly confronted(面對) them in the middle of the road. One of the men ran straight(立即) for a tree and grabbed(抓取) at a branch in order to suspend(懸掛) his trembling(顫抖) body in the foliage(樹葉). The other man stood stock still and then fell to the ground on purpose, pretending(假裝) to be dead. The wild beast immediately ran up to him, eager to seize(抓住) her victim(遇難者). With her curved bear claws(腳爪), she lifted the wretched(不幸的) man up off the ground, but since his limbs(肢) had grown stiff(硬的) and frozen with fear (for the usual warmth of life had left his body), the bear concluded that he was nothing but a rotting(腐朽) corpse(屍體). Thus, despite(儘管) her hunger, the bear abandoned(放棄) the man and went away to her den(巢穴). The men gradually(逐漸地) began to relax and started up their conversation again. The man who had only just now fled(逃跑) in fear was feeling far too sure of himself and he said to his companion(同伴), 'Tell me, my friend, what did that bear say to you while you were lying there shaking? She must have told you many things in that lengthy(漫長的) private conversation.' The other man replied, 'Indeed(確實), she gave me some quite important advice(勸告) including, alas(唉), one particular command that I cannot afford to forget: "Do not be too quick to resume(恢復) your fellowship(友誼) with that other man, in case you fall once again into the clutches(掌控) of another wild beast(野獸)."'


abandoned 離棄；放棄；拋棄；遺棄 
advice 勸告，忠告 
afford {could, be able to連用）買得起；有足夠的……（去做……）} 
alas （表示悲傷或遺憾）哎呀，唉 
beast （尤指大型或野生的）動物；野獸 
claws （某些獸類或鳥類的）爪，腳爪 
clutches （某人的）掌控，控制 
combine （使）結合；（使）聯合；（使）合併；（使）綜合 
companion 同伴，伴侶；朋友 
confronted 面對，面臨；遭遇；直面，正視 
corpse （通常指人的）屍體 
den （動物的）巢穴，窩 
despite 不管；儘管；無論 
discussing 討論，議論，談論 
fellowship 夥伴關係；交情；友誼 
fled （尤指因危險或恐懼而）逃跑 
foliage 葉子；樹葉；枝葉 
grabbed 攫取，抓取 
gradually 逐步地，逐漸地；平緩地 
indeed （加強語氣）真正地，確實，實在 
lengthy 漫長的，冗長的 
limbs 肢；臂；腳；翼 
narrow 狹的，狹窄的 
pretending 佯裝；假裝； 
resume 恢復；重新回到，重返（某地或某位置） 
rotting （使）腐敗；（使）腐爛；（使）腐朽 
seize 抓住；奪過 
stiff 硬的，挺的，堅實的 
straight 徑直，直接；立即 
subjects 主題；題目；題材 
suspend 懸掛 
trembling 顫抖；發抖 
unknown 未知的；不知名的；不瞭解的；不熟悉的 
victim 犧牲者，遇難者 
winding 彎彎的 
wretched 苦惱的；不幸的；素質差的 


