Fable 97

The Cricket(蟋蟀) and the Owl(貓頭鷹)

The cricket was making a great deal of noise(噪聲) and this greatly annoyed(生氣的) the owl, since she was accustomed(習慣的) to seek(尋找) out her food in the darkness of night and to sleep during the day inside the hollowed-out branch of a tree. The owl thus asked the cricket to keep quiet, which only provoked(激起) the cricket to make an even greater racket(喧嘩). Again the owl asked the cricket to keep quiet, and this triggered(引起) a still greater outburst(爆發) of noise. When the owl saw that she was accomplishing(做到) nothing since the cricket simply scorned(鄙視) her requests(要求), she decided to trick(哄騙) the chattering(喋喋不休) insect. 'Given that I cannot sleep because of your singing,' said the owl, 'which of course one might easily mistake for the tuneful(聲音悅耳的) strains(旋律) of Apollo's lyre(古絃樂器）), I've decided to drink some of the nectar(花蜜) which Athena recently gave me as a gift(禮物). Please come and let's drink it together, if that meets with your approval(同意).' The cricket happened to be extremely(非常) thirsty(口渴的) and she was also quite pleased by the compliments(恭維) which the owl had paid to her singing, so she gladly flew to where the owl was waiting. The owl then sealed(密封) up the entrance and seized the trembling(顫抖) cricket and brought her life to an end: what the cricket refused to do while living, she conceded(讓步) in death.

[Someone who does not respect(尊敬) his associates(同事) will usually be punished(懲罰) for his conceited(自以為是的) behaviour.]

NOTE: Apollo was the leader of the Muses and the god of music and poetry(詩歌); Athena was the goddess(女神) of wisdom(智慧) and warfare(戰爭). The owl was closely associated with Athena.



accomplishing 完成；實現；達到；做到 
accustomed 習慣的；適應了的 
annoyed 生氣的，煩惱的 
approval 贊成；同意；稱許 
associates 朋友；同事；（生意）夥伴 
chattering 嘮叨；喋喋不休 
compliments 恭維（話）；讚揚（話）；奉承（話） 
conceded （不情願地）讓步，答應給，讓與 
conceited 自負的，自大的，自以為是的 
cricket 蟋蟀 
extremely 非常；極端；極其 
gift 禮物；贈品 
goddess 女神 
lyre 形的古絃樂器） 
nectar 花蜜 
noise 噪聲；雜音；嘈雜聲；喧鬧聲 
outburst （尤指憤怒情緒的）爆發，迸發 
owl 貓頭鷹，鴞 
poetry （總稱）詩，詩歌 
provoked 激起，引起（尤指負面反應） 
punished 懲罰 
racket 喧嘩；吵鬧聲；連續不斷的喧嚷 
requests （禮貌、正式的）要求，請求 
respect 敬重，尊敬 
scorned 輕視，鄙視 
sealed 封閉的；密封的 
seek 尋找；尋求（尤指非物質的東西） 
strains 旋律；曲調 
thirsty 口渴的 
trembling 顫抖；發抖 
trick 哄騙 欺詐的 
triggered 引起，引發（壞事） 
tuneful 音調優美的，聲音悅耳的 
warfare 戰爭；作戰，交戰 
wisdom 智慧；明智 


