Fable 7

Aesop and the Runaway(逃跑，逃亡；私奔) Slave

A slave who was running away from his cruel(殘忍的，殘酷的) master(主人；僱主；戶主) happened to meet Aesop, who knew him as a neighbour((person living close by) 鄰居). 'What's got you so excited?' asked Aesop. 'Father Aesop -- a name you well deserve(應受，該得) since you are like a faher to me -- I'm going to be perfectly frank(坦白的；直率的；真誠的), since you can be safely trusted with my troubles. There's plenty of whipping(鞭打；笞刑；嚴懲) and not enough food. I'm constantly sent on errands(差事，差使) out to the farm without my provisions(食物；糧食；給養) for the journey. If the master(主人；僱主；戶主) dines(進餐，用餐) at home, I have to wait on him all night long; if he is invited somewhere else, I have to lie outside in the gutter(（道路旁的）排水溝，街溝) until dawn(黎明，拂曉). I should have earned(掙得的) my freedom by now, but my hairs have gone gray(灰色的；偏灰的) and I'm still slaving away. If I had done anything to deserve(應受，該得) this, I would stop complaining and suffer my fate(命運；天命，天數) in silence(無聲，寂靜). But the fact is that I never get enough to eat and my cruel(殘忍的，殘酷的) master(主人；僱主；戶主) is always after me. For these reasons, along with others that it would take too long to tell you, I've decided to go wherever my feet will lead me.' 'Well,' said Aesop, 'listen to what I say: if you must endure(忍耐，忍受) such hardship(艱難，困苦) without having done anything wrong, as you say, then what is going to happen to you now that you really are guilty(有罪的，犯……罪的) of something?' With those words of advice(勸告，忠告), Aesop scared(吃驚的，嚇壞的；恐懼的) the slave into giving up his plans of escape(逃跑；逃脫).

Moral: you should not add one problem to another.


advice 勸告，忠告 
cruel 殘忍的，殘酷的 
dawn 黎明，拂曉 
deserve 應受，該得 
dines 進餐，用餐 
earned 掙得的 
endure 忍耐，忍受 
errands 差事，差使 
escape 逃跑；逃脫 
fate 命運；天命，天數 
frank 坦白的；直率的；真誠的 
gray 灰色的；偏灰的 
guilty 有罪的，犯……罪的 
gutter （道路旁的）排水溝，街溝 
hardship 艱難，困苦 
master 主人；僱主；戶主 
neighbour {(person living close by) 鄰居} 
provisions 食物；糧食；給養 
runaway 逃跑，逃亡；私奔 
scared 吃驚的，嚇壞的；恐懼的 
silence 無聲，寂靜 
whipping 鞭打；笞刑；嚴懲 


